4. a) The transpiration rate is the change in total water loss over the time passed. For species A, between 5 and 15 minutes, this is equal to: (3.6 mL - 1.2 mL) / (15 minutes - 5 minutes) = 0.24 mL H2O / 100g of tissue / minute. For species B, it is equal to (1.8 mL - 0.4 mL) / (15 minutes - 5 minutes) = 0.14 mL H2O / 100g of tissue / minute. This shows that plant A transpires at a higher rate than plant B.
    b) A larger leaf area would lead to a greater rate of transpiration for a plant, since then for the same rate of water evaporation per square unit of area of the leaf, more water would be evaporating in total from the leaves, causing a greater rate of transpiration (since it is the water evaporating from the tips of the tree that draws water up from the roots). Another feature would be differently shaped stomata, or different concentrations of stomata. Since much water leaves from the inside of plant leaves by their stomata, having a greater number of stomata or more open ones would lead to a greater rate of transpiration. Lastly, a third structural factor would be the plant’s root-to-shoot ratio: having a larger such ratio would mean that the roots of the plant are able to absorb more water, causing the water potential difference to be greater between the roots and the atmosphere. Since the rate of water transpiration is directly dependent on this difference in potential (the difference is the ‘driving force’ of water moving up), having a greater root-to-shoot ratio would mean having a greater rate of transpiration.
        c) In the first equation, water potential is represented as the sum of the solute potential (psi-s) and the pressure potential (psi-p). The solute potential is directly dependent on the amount of solute in the water - the more dissolved substances there are (the higher the osmolarity), the lower the solute potential. This exhibits the tendency of water to osmose into a region where the water is less concentrated (since the solutes are more concentrated). The pressure potential, on the other hand, is directly proportional to the pressure being exerted on the solution. So, for example, a highly turgid plant cell (with high water pressure) would have a high pressure potential, indicating that water would be less inclined to osmose into it. 
        In the second equation, the pressure potential is ignored and the water potential is assumed to be only dependent on the solute potential (the pressure potential is equal to 0). Here, the solute potential (and water potential) is equal to -iCRT. The variable C is the concentration of the solute, and T is the temperature of the solution. Because the whole equation is negative, we can see that as the solute concentration and/or temperature go up, the water potential goes down. This is because with a greater solute concentration, the osmolarity is higher, meaning water is more likely to osmose into the solution, while with a greater temperature the water molecules will be moving faster overall, so any flow of water will happen faster. R is simply the universal gas constant, while i is number of individual particles that separate when the solute dissolves. For example, NaCl would have i = 2, since when dissolved it separates into Na+ and Cl-, which will result in twice the osmolarity than if it dissolved without breaking up, and therefore a twice lower water potential (this is why i is also a direct factor).

